---
title: "The Why"
date: 2022-05-02T17:56:27-07:00
draft: false
summary: "Why go to all this trouble?"
tags: ["DRM", "library maintenance", "personal", "archiving", "books", "ebooks", "access", "apps", "reading"]
---

This is likely to be a long one, but let's see what kind of summary I can manage: I'm going to the trouble of de-DRMing my electronic library because of the way that I read, interact with, and value books.

Especially when it comes to subculture, there is a great deal that can be lost when access to a text is lost; for many books, maybe this isn't an issue. Maybe I will be able to waltz into some store or some online retailer twenty years from now and re-purchase a copy of a book I'd lost access to when the app I'd purchased it from went bankrupt. Maybe no online retailer will ever engage in shady practices - I certainly don't think most businesses *intend* to cause their customers problems. Maybe I won't have editions or translations swapped out from under me (I haven't looked into whether this happens, but it seems feasible given the way ebook retailers have adopted a streaming-style model). In the end, I just don't know, and I value my interactions with text too highly to leave this access up to the decisions of others.

If that sounds pretty extra . . . yeah, I know. And if sounds contrary to several Terms of Service agreements . . . there's that too. It's certainly the reason that I've by and large avoided purchasing ebooks until very recently. With a library or subscription-style model, DRM doesn't bother me; it's a clear relationship agreed upon by reader and book-provider, where the reader isn't paying for any one specific book, but for timeboxed access to the selection of books provided by the service. My problem is that this model  extends to books paid for on an individual basis, ostensibly without the temporal element if you accept the assumption that any given online retailer is going to be around indefinitely. 

It's worth noting that I don't describe the books as "purchased," because these services, by and large, don't consider their consumers to have purchased these books at all - they have purchased *controlled access* to the files of the books that the service provides. While it's within the realm of fairly usual commerce to rent an individual item for a certain price for a certain length of time, the illusion of ownership, really, is what gets my hackles up.

Now is probably a good time to mention that I've worked in book publishing. I was working in book publishing as the ebook revolution was really finding its legs, and I saw the existential angst this caused and the strange economics it revealed. This isn't the place for me to write about that, and really, I was so far on the sidelines that I don't feel qualified to speak to that part of it with any deep expertise. I was in production, so my job for an ebook and a physical book was the same: get it edited, get it typeset, get it proofread, then get it packaged up for the printer and those who would be finalizing the ebook files. But I was there when five out of the then- Big Six were being [investigated for ebook price collusion](https://slate.com/technology/2012/03/apple-book-publishers-accused-of-price-collusion-on-e-books.html) with Apple. There were meetings, there was stress. I get it. It does not shock me that [it happened again last year](https://thehill.com/policy/technology/534364-amazon-hit-with-class-action-lawsuit-alleging-e-book-price-fixing/), this time with Amazon as the co-colluder.

I *want* to pay for books, and I do pay for books. I want to exchange some of my spare income for the fruits of the many hours of work from many different parties, from authors all the way down the chain to whoever is making that book available to my eyes. I don't work in that world anymore, but I'm invested in it. My house is loaded with physical books, and at this point? Ebooks make more sense for me. But if I can't keep the book files wherever I like and read them how I want, I just won't buy them.

If you've found yourself on this blog, you likely have some understanding of the frustration of realizing that a book you thought you purchased can only be accessed one way. If not, here's a quick walkthrough: The book lives in an app. Maybe an app you can't stand for some reason (I've met a few of these - reading is really personal, and the environment matters). You have another way to read books electronically - some other app you really like, or some custom setup you've devised - but you can't get your book out from its little ecosystem. You might not even find a file, or if you *do* find a file, you'll quickly find you can't open it. And most of the time, when this happens, you'll give up. You'll curse at your computer, complain to your friends, and walk away. Until one day, you don't, and you wind up on blogs like this one desperately trying to find a way to read the text you *know* is sitting in that file you dug out of the app data or device storage.

I've got a lot of emotions about this, clearly. This depth of feeling is less about the principle of "ownership" than it is about contrived barriers to access. Like, I know the information is there. It's right there. Frequently the *key* is right there too, just waiting for the special middle-manager of an app to put the key into the lock (which is why these things can be pretty reliably cracked). This stuff is tucked away, but it's not exactly hidden. It's just a little too complicated to want to bother with at first blush.

I'm going to bring this back to subculture and archiving, because that's the beating heart behind this frustration. Would it irritate me if I paid for a copy of some wildly popular, well-established book and then lost my ability to access it through some failure of the system that provided it to me? Sure it would! But I could get my hands on that book again, almost certainly, if I really wanted to. It's the more transient works I worry about. Books that don't see wide distribution, books that might be controversial, books that just can't pay their own bills and go "out of print," as it were. It happens. And the way these things continue to have life is through the people who have taken steps to save them.

It sounds dramatic, but it happens. Maybe it hasn't happened with an ebook retailer, I don't know. But I spend a good deal of my time in fandom spaces with a lot of other nerds interested in preserving fanworks, and the strange grief of disappearing archives, whether through censorship, abandonment on the part of the maintainers, or any number of other reasons - is a widely-shared experience. In general, I'm not inclined to trust anyone but myself and my hard drives with my continued ability to access works I care about. Simple portability annoyances aside, I want to tend to my own collection. I want to categorize it how I want, annotate it how I want, add notes and art and points of reference that will enrich my understanding of a particular work years in the future. When I read something I find valuable, I want to take care of it, and I want to protect it.

So there we are. I like to read. I think books are important. At this moment in my life, I want to read in an electronic format, and I want to manage a collection of books on my own terms. I had a couple thoughts about that. I will probably continue to have thoughts. Those were some of them. It's complicated.
